# Staking

This documentation introducing dfinance Proof-of-Stake consensus algorithm contains instructions on how to delegate DFI or become a validator, run a full node, and earn rewards.

# Proof-of-Stake

Any blockchain-based system must have a consensus algorithm, that secure blockchain from attacks (like [Sybil](https://academy.binance.com/security/sybil-attacks-explained) attacks, [Double Spending](https://academy.binance.com/security/double-spending-explained) attacks, [51%](https://academy.binance.com/security/what-is-a-51-percent-attack) attacks), forks, and allowing to validate if block mined/generated correctly and in time. 

Dfinance is based on [Proof-Of-Stake (PoS)](https://academy.binance.com/blockchain/delegated-proof-of-stake-explained) consensus algorithm developed by Cosmos team. That means that dfinance has a set of validators that can generate blocks thus securing the network. By utilizing Tendermint protocol dfinance trying to minimize possible attack vectors on network and amount of forks that could happen.

### Validators

Validator is a user who readies to up full-node, self-delegate minimum amount of DFI, keep it with great performance, and in such way secure network and earn rewards.

There are two kinds of validators: active ones and standby. The top 101 validators are active validators, who indeed can generate new blocks, the rest of validators are standby validators. The top can be generated by sorting all validators by their voting power, from greater to lesser. Each validator has a voting power (voting power of validators is determined by the amount of staking DFI bonded as collateral). These DFI coins can be self-deligated directly by validators themselves or delegated from other DFI holders. For their work active validators receiving network fees (collected from transactions) and network rewards (newly generated DFI). This way to become an active validator standby should get so much voting power as possible to get inside top. 

The active validators must generate blocks, sign them with the private key, and broadcast in the network, in a specific time slot that chosen special for this validator.

Any user of the network can become a validator. The user should send a special transaction to the network, and up a full node. Read more how to become a validator in [Become a validator](/staking/become_a_validator.md) documentation.

### Delegators

The procedure of delegation coins to a specific validator or own validator (self delegation) is calling **staking**. Once user delegated DFI coins, these coins can't be used anymore while it's delegated, in exchange of delegation user getting part of rewards/fees formed by validator - commission established by the validator. 

Any user can delegate his coins to validators to support liked validators and get part of fees received by validators they choose to delegate. By delegating user locks his tokens. Delegators should actively participate in choosing validators, because if user delegates to the performance-less validator (let's say validator which misses blocks or double sign blocks/pre-votes). In such cases, both validator and delegator will be exposed to the slashing procedure.

**Not ready yet, but planned for next versions:**

Also, by delegating coins, delegator getting sDFI coins, that validator will be able to use in financial instruments, provde liquidity, low or borrow, etc.
This feature will change the staking maturation time. Currently, if the user delegates DFI, validator getting users' stake immediately, but once maturation and sDFI mechanism will be enabled, it will take the period in a few weeks. Such liquidity staking mechanism is described in the dfinance economic model, which will be announced later in the near time.

### Full node

A full node is [dnode](../architecture/dnode.md) instance that stores all blockchain data include transactions, blocks, consensus settings, and at the same time it validates new coming transactions and blocks. Each full node has a public IP address, so other full nodes can communicate with it via p2p. All validators in the network must run their full node, as validators must have all information about the network to verify and approve transactions, blocks.

After this short introduction to staking, let's continue with current documentation and see how we can delegate.
